README.md, before:

# dfe-analytics-dataform
Dataform package containing commonly used SQL functions and table definitions, for use with event data streamed to BigQuery using DfE-Digital/dfe-analytics: https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-analytics.

## How to install
1. Set up your Dataform project.
2. Ensure that it is connected to your BigQuery project.
3. Ensure that it is synchronised with its own dedicated Github repository.
4. Add the following line within the dependencies block of the package.json file in your Dataform project:
```
"dfe-analytics-dataform": "git+https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-analytics-dataform.git#v0.2"
```
It should now look something like:
```
{
    "dependencies": {
        "@dataform/core": "1.21.1",
        "dfe-analytics-dataform": "git+https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-analytics-dataform.git#v0.2"
    }
}
```
5. Click the 'Install Packages' button on the right hand side of the package.json screen. This will also update package-lock.json automatically.
6. Create a file called definitions/dfe_analytics_dataform.js that looks like the following:
```
const dfeAnalyticsDataform = require("dfe-analytics-dataform");

// Repeat the lines below for each and every events table you want dfe-analytics-dataform to process in your Dataform project
dfeAnalyticsDataform({
  tableSuffix: "Your table suffix here",
  bqProjectName: "Your BigQuery project name here",
  bqDatasetName: "Your BigQuery dataset name here",
  bqEventsTableName: "Your BigQuery events table name here - usually just 'events'",
  dataSchema: [{
    entityTableName: "Your entity table name here from your production database analytics.yml",
    keys: [{
      keyName: "Your string field name here",
      dataType: "string"
    }, {
      keyName: "Yoour boolean field name here",
      dataType: "boolean"
    }, {
      keyName: "Your timestamp field name here (when it actually contains a date!)",
      dataType: "date_as_timestamp"
    }]
  }]
});
```
7. Replace the parameters in this file with the parameters you need - including specifying the full schema from your analytics.yml file with data types.
8. Create a second file called includes/data_functions.js containing the following line:
```
module.exports = require("dfe-analytics-dataform/includes/data_functions");
```
9. Commit your changes and merge to master.
10. Run a 'full refresh' on your entire pipeline, and resolve any errors this flags (e.g. errors you made when specifying a dataSchema).

## Tables, assertions, and declarations this will create
For each occurrence of ```dfeAnalyticsDataform()``` in ```definitions/dfe_analytics_dataform.js``` this package will create the following automatically in your Dataform project. You can view and manage these within the UI by opening ```definitions/dfe_analytics_dataform.js```.

The names of these will vary depending on the ```tableSuffix``` you have specified. For example if your ```tableSuffix``` was ```foo``` then the following will be created:
- A declaration of your events table, which you can access via ```${ref("bqDatasetName","bqEventsTableName")}``` (replacing those values with your own).
- An incremental table called ```foo_entity_version```, containing each version of every entity in the database over time, with a ```valid_from``` and ```valid_to``` timestamp.
- A table called ```foo_analytics_yml_latest```, which is a table version of the ```dataSchema``` you specified.
- For each ```entityTableName``` you specified in ```dataSchema``` like ```bar```, tables called something like ```bar_version_foo``` and ```bar_latest_foo```. ```bar_version_foo``` is a denormalised ('flattened') version of ```foo_version```, flattened according to the schema for ```foo``` you specified in ```dataSchema```. ```bar_latest_foo``` is the same as ```bar_version_foo``` except that it only includes the latest version of each entity (i.e. with ```valid_to IS NULL```).
- Assertions to help spot when your ```dataSchema``` has become out of date or has a problem. These will tell you if ```foo_entities_are_missing_expected_fields``` or if ```foo_unhandled_field_or_entity_is_being_streamed```. The former will halt your pipeline from executing, while the latter will just alert you to the assertion failure.

## Using the functions in your queries
Dataform allows you to break into Javascript within a SQLX file using the syntax ```${Your Javascript goes here.}```. If you created includes/data_functions.js then this means that you can use the functions in the data_functions module provided by this package within SQL queries in the rest of your Dataform project.

The examples below assume that you have an events table created by the dfe-analytics gem which contains a field called ```DATA``` which is an ARRAY of STRUCTs named ```DATA.key``` and ```DATA.value```:
- Extract the value of a given ```key``` from within ```DATA```. If more than one value is present for ```key``` or in the unlikely event that the same ```key``` occurs multiple times, returns a comma-separated list of all values for this key. If the only values are empty strings or not present, returns ```NULL```.

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtract("DATA","key")}```

- Extract the value of all ```key```s beginning with the string ```key_to_extract_begins``` from DATA and return them as a comma-separated list of all ```value```s for this ```key```. If the only ```value```s are empty strings or no keys begin ```key_to_extract_begins```, returns ```NULL```.

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractListOfStringsBeginning("DATA","key_to_extract_begins")}```

- Return ```TRUE``` if a given ```key``` is present in ```DATA```, and ```FALSE``` otherwise

> ```${data_functions.keyIsInEventData("DATA","key")}```

- Shortcut to run ```eventDataExtract``` and then parse the string extracted as a timestamp, attempting multiple formats. If timezone is not present, assumes timezone is Europe/London. If unable to parse the string as a timestamp in any of the formats, returns ```NULL``` (not an error).

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractTimestamp("DATA","key")}```

- Shortcut to run ```eventDataExtract``` and then parse the string extracted as a date, attempting multiple formats. If unable to parse the string as a date in any of the formats, returns ```NULL``` (not an error).

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractDate("DATA","key")}```

- Shortcut to extract a string like ```[3,75,2,1]``` from ```DATA``` using ```event_data_extract``` and then convert it into an array of integers.

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractIntegerArray("DATA","your_key_name_here")}```

- Sets or replaces the ```value``` of ```key``` to/with ```value``` and returns the entirety of a new version of ```DATA```, having done this

> ```${data_functions.eventDataCreateOrReplace("DATA","key","value")}```

Commit message:

Add README docs for data_schema_json_latest

README.md, after:

# dfe-analytics-dataform
Dataform package containing commonly used SQL functions and table definitions, for use with event data streamed to BigQuery using DfE-Digital/dfe-analytics: https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-analytics.

## How to install
1. Set up your Dataform project.
2. Ensure that it is connected to your BigQuery project.
3. Ensure that it is synchronised with its own dedicated Github repository.
4. Add the following line within the dependencies block of the package.json file in your Dataform project:
```
"dfe-analytics-dataform": "git+https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-analytics-dataform.git#v0.2"
```
It should now look something like:
```
{
    "dependencies": {
        "@dataform/core": "1.21.1",
        "dfe-analytics-dataform": "git+https://github.com/DFE-Digital/dfe-analytics-dataform.git#v0.2"
    }
}
```
5. Click the 'Install Packages' button on the right hand side of the package.json screen. This will also update package-lock.json automatically.
6. Create a file called definitions/dfe_analytics_dataform.js that looks like the following:
```
const dfeAnalyticsDataform = require("dfe-analytics-dataform");

// Repeat the lines below for each and every events table you want dfe-analytics-dataform to process in your Dataform project
dfeAnalyticsDataform({
  tableSuffix: "Your table suffix here",
  bqProjectName: "Your BigQuery project name here",
  bqDatasetName: "Your BigQuery dataset name here",
  bqEventsTableName: "Your BigQuery events table name here - usually just 'events'",
  dataSchema: [{
    entityTableName: "Your entity table name here from your production database analytics.yml",
    keys: [{
      keyName: "Your string field name here",
      dataType: "string"
    }, {
      keyName: "Yoour boolean field name here",
      dataType: "boolean"
    }, {
      keyName: "Your timestamp field name here (when it actually contains a date!)",
      dataType: "date_as_timestamp"
    }]
  }]
});
```
7. Replace the parameters in this file with the parameters you need - including specifying the full schema from your analytics.yml file with data types. Optionally, you can generate a blank dataSchema JSON to paste in here by creating the data_schema_json_latest table from the right hand sidebar when you open dfe_analytics_dataform in the UI. This will save you time if you're starting with a blank project.
8. Create a second file called includes/data_functions.js containing the following line:
```
module.exports = require("dfe-analytics-dataform/includes/data_functions");
```
9. Commit your changes and merge to master.
10. Run a 'full refresh' on your entire pipeline, and resolve any errors this flags (e.g. errors you made when specifying a dataSchema).

## Tables, assertions, and declarations this will create
For each occurrence of ```dfeAnalyticsDataform()``` in ```definitions/dfe_analytics_dataform.js``` this package will create the following automatically in your Dataform project. You can view and manage these within the UI by opening ```definitions/dfe_analytics_dataform.js```.

The names of these will vary depending on the ```tableSuffix``` you have specified. For example if your ```tableSuffix``` was ```foo``` then the following will be created:
- A declaration of your events table, which you can access via ```${ref("bqDatasetName","bqEventsTableName")}``` (replacing those values with your own).
- An incremental table called ```foo_entity_version```, containing each version of every entity in the database over time, with a ```valid_from``` and ```valid_to``` timestamp.
- A table called ```foo_analytics_yml_latest```, which is a table version of the ```dataSchema``` you specified.
- For each ```entityTableName``` you specified in ```dataSchema``` like ```bar```, tables called something like ```bar_version_foo``` and ```bar_latest_foo```. ```bar_version_foo``` is a denormalised ('flattened') version of ```foo_version```, flattened according to the schema for ```foo``` you specified in ```dataSchema```. ```bar_latest_foo``` is the same as ```bar_version_foo``` except that it only includes the latest version of each entity (i.e. with ```valid_to IS NULL```).
- Assertions to help spot when your ```dataSchema``` has become out of date or has a problem. These will tell you if ```foo_entities_are_missing_expected_fields``` or if ```foo_unhandled_field_or_entity_is_being_streamed```. The former will halt your pipeline from executing, while the latter will just alert you to the assertion failure.

## Using the functions in your queries
Dataform allows you to break into Javascript within a SQLX file using the syntax ```${Your Javascript goes here.}```. If you created includes/data_functions.js then this means that you can use the functions in the data_functions module provided by this package within SQL queries in the rest of your Dataform project.

The examples below assume that you have an events table created by the dfe-analytics gem which contains a field called ```DATA``` which is an ARRAY of STRUCTs named ```DATA.key``` and ```DATA.value```:
- Extract the value of a given ```key``` from within ```DATA```. If more than one value is present for ```key``` or in the unlikely event that the same ```key``` occurs multiple times, returns a comma-separated list of all values for this key. If the only values are empty strings or not present, returns ```NULL```.

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtract("DATA","key")}```

- Extract the value of all ```key```s beginning with the string ```key_to_extract_begins``` from DATA and return them as a comma-separated list of all ```value```s for this ```key```. If the only ```value```s are empty strings or no keys begin ```key_to_extract_begins```, returns ```NULL```.

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractListOfStringsBeginning("DATA","key_to_extract_begins")}```

- Return ```TRUE``` if a given ```key``` is present in ```DATA```, and ```FALSE``` otherwise

> ```${data_functions.keyIsInEventData("DATA","key")}```

- Shortcut to run ```eventDataExtract``` and then parse the string extracted as a timestamp, attempting multiple formats. If timezone is not present, assumes timezone is Europe/London. If unable to parse the string as a timestamp in any of the formats, returns ```NULL``` (not an error).

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractTimestamp("DATA","key")}```

- Shortcut to run ```eventDataExtract``` and then parse the string extracted as a date, attempting multiple formats. If unable to parse the string as a date in any of the formats, returns ```NULL``` (not an error).

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractDate("DATA","key")}```

- Shortcut to extract a string like ```[3,75,2,1]``` from ```DATA``` using ```event_data_extract``` and then convert it into an array of integers.

> ```${data_functions.eventDataExtractIntegerArray("DATA","your_key_name_here")}```

- Sets or replaces the ```value``` of ```key``` to/with ```value``` and returns the entirety of a new version of ```DATA```, having done this

> ```${data_functions.eventDataCreateOrReplace("DATA","key","value")}```
